---
layout: page
title: Conclusion
description: ""
image:
  feature: abstract-3.jpg
  credit: dargadgetz
  creditlink: http://www.dargadgetz.com/ios-7-abstract-wallpaper-pack-for-iphone-5-and-ipod-touch-retina/
  
---

## Conclusion

The amalgamation of the graphs, charts, and maps in this webtext, taken together, create a more polyvocal and nuanced understanding of anti-gentrification rhetoric on Twitter from 2016-2018, perhaps even a partial “ante-narrative” of gentrification. Natasha Jones et al. (2016), state that “[i]n contrast to narratives, which Boje (2011) conceived as characterized by ‘stability and order and univocality’, antenarratives are poly-vocal, dynamic, and fragmented—yet highly interconnected” (p. 212). Boje and Jones are using ante-narratives to theorize the way that dominant narratives, like technical communication’s apolitical, positivist one, can be troubled and made more multi-faceted by the inclusion of ante-narratives that demonstrate parallel, although overlooked, narratives of activist storytelling. Similarly, I argue that this concept of antenarrative--”the poly-vocal, dynamic, and fragmented--yet highly interconnected” stories of anti-gentrification activism circulating on Twitter can provide an important corrective to dominant narratives both about the uses of data and data visualization and the dominant narratives of universal uplift or inevitability that accompany urban renewal. As we continue to engage with large datasets, and the technologies like computational analysis and visualization tools necessary to make sense of them, feminist contributions like the ante-narrative can enrich rhetoric and writing studies in formulating and practicing digital methodologies for data analysis and visualization. 

Before I summarize what I see as the benefits of feminist rhetorical methodologies on data and visualization, I will first identify the limitations of the way in which I’ve applied this approach to my study of anti-gentrification rhetoric on Twitter. Throughout this webtext, I’ve tried to point out how the choices I’ve made and the affordances of the tools I’ve used shaped the resultant visualizations and the partial knowledge they communicate, as well as the importance of situating data in bodies and geographic locations; however, as scholars like D’Ignazio and Klein point out, feminist visualization practices should also endeavor to “examine power and aspire towards empowerment” (n.p.). The authors go on to explain that to do so involves “ensuring that the outcomes of our design research connect back to the communities that first made
them possible”. At this stage in my research, I haven’t yet done enough to include the communities that made this data possible, particularly the Defend Boyle Heights community. Although there are logistical hurdles to doing so, truly situated feminist methodologies would involve these efforts towards community-informed research and visualization and also offer reciprocity to the communities. In the case of my study, this will involve contacting Defend Boyle Heights, sharing the data research, offering opportunities for input and correction, and providing an opportunity for the community to opt-out of any additional data collection and research. As an effort towards reciprocity, we might offer the data collection, analysis, and visualizations to the community to be used for their own purposes. In the case of DBH, they might use the map visualization towards their efforts of persuading others of the negative impact of gentrifying forces in their community and to illustrate their tactics and impact to potential alliances. As I acknowledge these shortcomings and ways in which I will seek to modify my methodology to more closely align with feminist concerns for situated and contextualized research, I also urge us to begin conversations within our universities and other places of research about how they might build the institutional infrastructures to support community-connected data research and provide the support necessary for ethical community research partnerships. 

Despite these shortcomings, feminist-informed methodologies like those I’ve formulated here offer rhetoric and writing studies critical frameworks to push back at data epistemologies that rely on notions that such ways of knowing are objective, neutral, and apolitical. This is no less important for those of us who engage with large Twitter datasets that through the lens of the spreadsheet “appear immediate, seamless, unified, isolated from time and space” (Wolff, Conclusion). Instead, feminist theories push back at such epistemologies by insisting on the subjective and rhetorical qualities of data, computational analytics, and visualization. As I’ve attempted to highlight throughout this website, feminist frameworks insist on the subjectivity and constructed nature of data, the hierarchical and reductive role of classification inherent in database structure, and the way that the perspective and framing of most data visualization creates the illusion of detached objectivity. As I’ve also tried to emphasize, we can enact these frameworks in our methodologies through conscious and rigorous efforts to attend to subjectivity at all levels of data collection, analysis, and visualization; see from perspectives that dissent from dominant cultural, social, and technological narratives; shine light on the authoring characteristics of data visualizations conventions that cause them to appear omniscient and totalizing; and, perhaps most importantly, by put large datasets in conversation with smaller, more situated studies. 

In the previous pages, I’ve pointed out how my own subjective position and experiences led me to orient towards this research in particular ways that in some aspects both explore how I’m tied to the shape of this research and protected me from being a true insider participant in the experience of gentrification that I’m attempting to study. I’ve also pointed out how the choices I made in what data to collect and how to collect, analyze, and visualize it were shaped by my perspectives and the affordances of available tools and conventions. Furthermore, by choosing to depart from computational analytics of the large dataset and focus on building a smaller study around Defend Boyle Heights’ tweet perspective, I dissented from the pattern-finding and quantification that is the primary mode of understanding large datasets. Instead, I attempted to amplify DBH’s dissenting perspective on urban change as cultural and human erasure by mapping the forces they identified as negatively impacting their landscape and communities while also visualizing the embodied, communicative, and legal actions they’ve taken to resist these forces and continue to shape their neighborhood in a way that reflects their needs and identities. Although the visualizations in this webtext make some progress in understanding anti-gentrification rhetoric through polyvocality and multiplicity, I’ve also elaborated on the ways in which the existing tools’ affordances and my technological skill level weren’t adequate for reaching the kind of embodied and situated visualizations that would go further in disrupting the omniscient and totalizing view of charts, graphs, and maps that always occlude even as they tacitly convince their audience of their authority. Furthermore, I attempted to put the smaller DBH data visualizations in conversation with the dataset as a whole by emphasizing the way in which embodied and situated resistance of DBH demonstrates the concrete and physical instantiation of the cultural homogenization and erasure prevalent in ad-hoc anti-gentrification rhetoric in the dataset as a whole; however, I think that I can go further in adopting research practices that utilize feminist and rhetorical theories to enhance the outcomes of this project and influence broader data analysis and visualization research practices. Put simply, I believe rhetoric and writing studies can offer ways to turn the data paradigm inside out.       

First, we can go further to privilege manually coding informed by grounded theory over algorithmic analysis. Several of the rhetorical data studies I’ve referred to in this webtext such as work from William I. Woolf, Laurie Gries, and Endres et al. adopted some form of grounded theory even though they also used computational modes at various stages of data collection, analysis, and visualization. Endres et al. (2016) emphasize that grounded theory acknowledges “analysis to be a social practice with all its attendant subjectivities, partial knowledges, and positionalities” (Knigge, L., and Cope, p. 2025-2026). As my own research progresses, I will use the themes derived from the grounded theory coding of DBH’s tweets to develop ways to apply these codes to an analysis of the larger dataset. This point informs the second way we might influence data analysis and visualization studies more broadly: allowing small data to inform large data analysis. Rather than leading with large-scale pattern analysis and deriving outcomes from this algorithmic analysis, the more embodied, situated accounts in our small data analysis could become the theoretical orientation guiding the analysis of the whole. For instance, I might use the thematic and action codes I’ve derived from DBH tweets to train top modelling tools like Scikit or Mallet in an analysis of the whole dataset. I don’t expect that the whole dataset can be reduced to these codes anymore than DBH’s tweet codes totally encapsulate an understanding of their embodied actions, communication practices, or legal actions, nor all the thematic entities at play in gentrification on a global scale; however, leading with theories born from small data significantly departs from what Rob Kitchin (2014) identifies as one of the false epistemological beliefs of the big data paradigm that, “through the application of agnostic data analytics the data can speak for themselves free of human bias or framing, and any patterns and relationships within Big Data are inherently meaningful and truthful” (p. 4). What’s more, by starting with small data analysis informed by critical and rhetorical theories as well as traditional humanities research practices of close reading and immersive research, we resist adopting the blackboxed logic of algorithmic analysis and the seeming neutrality of pattern-finding in favor of explicitly forming theories, hypotheses, and critical stances that don’t relinquish research outcomes to the novel results of computational analytics but instead bring our theoretical and methodological choices to bear on data research.

Finally, I hope the feminist and rhetorically informed method in practice has demonstrated how these frameworks allow not just for a critical awareness of the affordances of tools but an active engagement to retool them according to our theoretical perspectives and disciplinary purposes. By reorienting the locus of study from the quantitatively greatest data points in the Tableau chart and graph visualizations to using Tableau to identify what might otherwise be missed and overlooked in these measures, re-arrangement becomes a key rhetorical strategy we can employ to locate and human read individual tweets that might otherwise become the “missing” data in our collections. By first being aware of the guiding perspective of tools and visualizations like Tableau and then actively using them differently--arranging the affordances to locate and highlight data that is present but not deemed significant by these technologies--we not only take more responsibility for our research outcomes, but develop practices that come closer to actualizing the playful and inventive potential of engaging technological infrastructures advocated by rhetoric scholars like Gries and Eyman. We also demonstrate to those outside our disciplines that data isn’t neutral, tools aren’t fact-finding machines, and visualizations don’t lack authorial framing and perspective. Instead, perhaps we progress towards what Kitchin (2014) identifies as one of the positive potentialities of humanities-based engagement with large datasets and their attendant technologies: modifying the the positivist data epistemology to show that “the research conducted is reflexive and open with respect to the research process, acknowledging the contingencies and relationalities of the approach employed, thus producing nuanced and contextualized accounts” (p. 9).

Although I eagerly await free and accessible data collection, analysis, and visualization tools built around our shared disciplinary principles and needs, I also share Beveridge’s urgency that the time to develop data analysis methodologies is now. As Cathy O’Neill (2016) emphasizes in Weapons of Math Destruction, data born ways of knowing are only increasing and “the [p]redictive models are, increasingly, the tools we will be relying on to run our institutions, deploy our resources, and manage our lives” (p. 218). As such, data literacy, which includes methodologies for practicing data analysis and visualization, is paramount to our research and teaching practices. Teaching students data literacy through hands-on engagement with collection, analysis, and visualization tools can make manifest the ways in which data is not abstract but situated and constructed. Furthermore, as modes like datafied ways of knowing and visualization become dominant ways of communicating and knowing the world, students should develop the literacies and skills that allow critical engagements with data and visualization. 

As I hope this webtext demonstrates, our disciplines are uniquely equipped to offer critical and generative methodologies that challenge the assumptions around data and visualizations while also offering a critical and generative way forward. While many of the tools I’ve employed are low or no-cost and many of them don’t require any programming skills, some of the programming required for facets of this study like the R analysis and the CartoDB Map required technological skills that exceeded my own capabilities; however, university technologists and computationally savvy librarians are often available to consult and support technological engagements that help us actualize digital projects. Such collaborations increase our own techno-literacies and make more kinds of digital methodologies possible. My hope is that more of us will not just explore large datasets and analytics, but create interinstitutional and cross-institutional collaborations that, through the sharing of different skills and disciplinary perspectives, reinvent what’s possible and preferable with data analysis and visualization.

<div class="next-container">
	<a class="next-page" href="{{ site.url }}/references/">References</a>
</div>
