---
layout: post
title: Introduction
description: ""
image:
  background: triangular.png
---

In recent years, rhetoric and writing studies has begun to engage with large datasets and the technological tools involved in collecting, processing, and visualizing data related to a vast array of social phenomena. Kairos has published work involving big datasets from Laurie Gries (2016) who combines data types, including social media data, to track, largely through data visualization tools, the ongoing circulation and transformation of the Obama Hope image. In another Kairos piece, William I. Wolff (2015) describes his methodology for collecting and examining a large dataset of tweets around a Bruce Springsteen concert to characterize Twitter-based fan writing practices. Jason Palmeri and Ben McCorkle (2017) take a Distant View of English Journal 1912-2012 by using systematic coding schemed and data visualization methods to historicize the disciplinary development of writing studies’ relationship to technology. In each publication, the authors thoughtfully reflect on the constraints and limitations of their studies, particularly highlighting the ways in which their choices in data collection, processing, and visualization have shaped their findings. Studies like these acknowledge the influence of “the interplay of material infrastructures, users and texts” and by doing so begin to trouble the objective and scientific valence often ascribed to data analysis and visualization, especially when attached to “big data” (Leurs, 137). And yet, as rhetoric and writing studies scholars continue to tread into the waters of data and visualization, and the landscape of technological tools and their affordances continues to transform, often resulting in tools that become simultaneously easier to use and more “black boxed,” it becomes increasingly difficult--and important--for digital rhetoric and writing studies scholars to contribute methodological perspectives that illuminate the unseen and provide new possibilities for rhetorically engaging technologies at the level of infrastructure. To contribute to these conversations, I argue for a rhetorical and feminist methodological approach to social media data analysis and visualization that deepens data viz’s critical possibilities and conclusions, even within hard-coded software, to expand the possibilities for visualizations and interpretations, rather than narrowing data analysis conclusions to grasp toward a truth value (boyd and Crawford, 2012).

Recent work by digital rhetoric and writing studies scholars demonstrates growing engagement with what Eyman (2016) maps as one of the emerging directions in digital rhetoric: a socio-cultural and technological engagement with infrastructure, including “the [often blackboxed] software tools that allow nearly anyone to expertly remix content across multiple modes and media” (p. 29). Key to Eyman’s definition of infrastructure is an understanding and fluency with the ways different kinds of technologies work and the social and institutional knowledge of the infrastructures in which these technologies are housed and employed. Rhetorical concerns with infrastructure have manifested in multiple special issues in digital rhetoric journals, like Present Tense’s special issue on the Rhetoric of Platforms, which argues that theorizing and practicing digital rhetoric is inseparable from considerations of infrastructure, or “a meeting point of hardware, software, and culture” (Present Tense, Platform CFP). Such research points to the way in which digital infrastructures create unique and constantly shifting constraints and possibilities for composition and agency. As Ridolfo and DeVoss (2009) argue, the infrastructure of Web 2.0 allows for the rhetorical velocity of texts and necessitates a digital update to the canon of delivery. Gallagher (2017) reveals how the infrastructural layer of algorithms creates new media audiences that participate in the remix and remediation of digital texts and data. Within the growing body of writing studies literature focusing on infrastructure, the shape data and visualization take is not controlled solely by the researcher, nor is agency enacted solely by users, but co-constructed by the technologies and multiple situated contexts that become involved in communication and analytic technologies.

Not only are these technologies active players in our digital research practices and the meaning communicated, but Brock, K., & Mehlenbacher (2017) argue that “code might produce and reproduce certain norms, values, and social actions” (2). These same authors also argue that “the ‘digital,’ as a collection of computational machines and the logics and experiences involved in using them, remains obscured for many” (5). The issue of access is deeply tied to technological and social infrastructures, as Aaron Beveridge (2018) argues by identifying several barriers for rhetoric and writing studies’ engagement with data analytics and data literacy, especially social media data analysis. Equally as important as physical access, Beveridge emphasizes the importance of access to “current research methodologies” for the study of large data sets often generated through streaming APIs like Twitter’s. Although Gries and Beveridge are both advocates of creating data analysis and visualization tools especially for the specific research needs of those in rhetoric and writing studies, and indeed both have projects underway to do just that, existing tools provide opportunities for rhetoric and writing studies to develop such methodologies while simultaneously gaining the technological knowledge of such that will allow us to push against their affordances and perhaps contribute insight into the ways in which future tools might be designed in a more just and rhetorically-informed way. As these exciting new tools for rhetoric and writing studies research continue to develop, existing tools are viable options for building data analysis and visualization methodologies.

In this webtext, I will share the feminist rhetorical methodology of social media data and visualization I’ve begun to develop as I’ve worked over the past two years to collect and analyze a large dataset of tweets containing the keyword “gentrification.” Like Laurie Gries’ Tracking Obama Hope project, I’m interested in how writing and visual rhetoric circulates to activate publics and ignite collective actions, but I’m particularly interested in how that circulating visuality impacts the the changing shape and socio-cultural make-up of urban spaces and their communities. I focused my collection on Twitter data because Twitter has proven to be a communication space for marginalized populations to voice dissent and to collectively take action to challenge dominant power structures (Summers, White Paper). Likewise, Leigh Gruwell (2018) observes that rhetoric and writing studies has “embraced social media as both an object of study as well as a methodological tool” and yet has not gone far enough to consider how the platform shapes our research (para. 2). This study engages with Twitter as an entry point into a wider ecology of emergent social media platforms, physical environments, and bodies that leave traces we can follow to better understand the consequences of their ecological relations. Exploration of these interacting entities informs our understanding of activism in the digital age and the way in which networked visuality and communication technologies complicate our understanding of material processes like gentrification, collective activities like activism, and “ecological relationality as participating in rhetorical practices and their theorization” (Rickert, 2013, p. 3). 

Analyzing this large social media dataset has been inseparable from processes of data visualization. Because of the enormous size of this collection, I wouldn’t be able sift and count and qualitatively explore this dataset without the technological tools of visualization, “the reduction and spatial representation of datasets in such a way as to make them more intelligible than in their pre‐visualization, tabular format” (8). This webtext won’t simply focus on the visualizations I’ve generated, however, but delve into the infrastructural affordances of this process and how a feminist rhetorical perspective might work with and against the possibilities of these technologies. Social media data collection, analysis, and visualization involves multiple technological and human processes, some of which are obscured by the blackboxed quality of digital tools and the mythology around data’s presumed neutrality. Instead of relying on the scientific veneer of data science, I strive to contribute to the growing body of critical scholarship that offers alternatives to data analysis and visualization methods that privilege quantitative reasoning and focus on revealing “newly visible patterns.” In my case, quantification and pattern finding has been a beginning point for formulating subsequent research directions and using both analytical and inventive approaches to studying large dataset. Data analysis and visualization are enhanced and complicated by adopting a feminist rhetorical methodology that values qualitative data, multiplicity, and narrative. In using feminist theories, I’m connecting to diverse and varied critical perspectives that “encompasses a range of ideas about how identity is constructed, how power is assigned, and how knowledge is generated, as well as how a range of intersectional forces [19] such as race, class, and ability, combine to influence the experience of being in the world (1)” (D’Ignazio & Klein, 2016). This work is also an answer to Johanna Drucker’s call “to attend to how visualizations do their work if we are to fully understand the work that they do” (913). Such a methodology provides for greater understanding of the way in which such data is shaped and adds nuance to the way in which we work with large datasets to make knowledge and share insight gained through data analysis and visualization. Finding a feminist perspective through data, as I’ll show, results in a methodology that is not just analytical and critical but also generative and inventive. 

<div class="next-container">
	<a class="next-page" href="/background-methods/">Next Page</a>
</div>	
